<html><head><TITLE>MILK SECRETION</title></head><body>
<h1>MILK SECRETION</h1><p><p><pre>
COLLECTION: GOAT HANDBOOK
ORIGIN: United States
DATE INCLUDED: June 1992

Extension Goat Handbook

This material was contributed from collections at the National Agricultural
Library.  However, users should direct all inquires about the contents to
authors or originating agencies.


DOCN 000000050
NO   F-7
TI   MILK SECRETION
AU   G. F. W. Haenlein
          R. Caccese; U. of Delaware, Newark
RV   P. E. Meckley; U. of Delaware, Newark
DE   Anatomy and Physiology

Text
1    Growth and Development
         The mammary glands of goats are specialized  cutaneous glands,
     related to the sebaceous (oil producing glands of skin and hair) and
     sweat glands.  From a physiological viewpoint, they might be  classified
     as accessory reproductive organs, as  they are intrinsic to the
     reproductive function.  Mammary glands are present in both sexes.
     Functional activity in the male is rare, although milk  secreting glands
     have been developed in both  virgin does and bucks by repeated gentle
     massage  of the mammary area. Differentiation in growth of  mammary
     glands between the sexes is usually not  obvious until puberty. At that
     time, glandular  enlargement occurs in the female. Most of it is in
     increased amount of connective tissue and fat  deposition, but not
     increased formation of  secretory tissue. Estrus periods bring on
     increases  in the development of the secretory and duct  tissues, with a
     recession during the anestrus  period. The process of enlargement is
     minimal  however, and the glands will not approach a functional state
     until the animal becomes pregnant.

2        Growth of lactating tissue is dependent mainly  upon two hormones,
     estrogen from the developing  follicles and progesterone from the corpus
     luteum.  The corpus luteum is the naturally regressed stage  of the
     follicle after it has ovulated, releasing ova into the oviduct.
     Estrogen, which is cyclic,  stimulates the duct development of the
     mammary  gland. Progesterone is almost continuously  secreted during
     pregnancy, causing secretory  tissue development. As the gestation
     period nears  its end, the mammary glands become capable of  producing
     milk. After parturition, the rate of milk  secretion increases for some
     time, reaches a peak,  and then gradually declines. A loss of secretory
     epithelial cells occurs during involution, although  some new cells are
     being formed. The general activity level of the individual cells
     declines also. At  the cessation of milk production, secretory
     epithelial cells will totally disappear, leaving only  myoepithelial
     cells. The frequent release of oxytocin may slow down the rate of the
     involution  process and some goats may secrete milk for years
     continuously.

3        Milk secretion during lactation tends to inhibit  the normal cycling
     of the estrus periods, with some  temporary suppression of ovulation.
     With time,  there will be a return to normal estrus cycles. Milk
     production will decline, and the glands will go into  involution;
     although not complete, since the glands  increase in size with
     successive pregnancies.

4        Hormones other than estrogen and progesterone  that influence
     development of mammary glands or  lactation originate from the
     hypothalamus and  pituitary glands of the brain.

5        The anterior pituitary produces in response to  stimulation of the
     hypothalamus six hormones,  which exert either a direct or indirect
     influence on  milk secretion. Somatotropic or growth hormone  (STH);
     follicle stimulating hormone (FSH); luteinizing hormone (LH); prolactin
     (most intimately  associated with initiating and maintaining lactation);
     thyrotropic hormone (TTH); and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).

6        The posterior pituitary stores two hormones  from the hypothalamus
     both related to lactation.  Vasopressin or antidiuretic hormone (ADH),
     decreases the amount of water lost in the urine, retaining it instead
     for use. Oxytocin is best known  for its ability to cause milk ''let
     down'' in mammals, although it is also capable of stimulating
     contractions in other smooth muscles such as the uterus  during estrus
     and parturition, as well as in the  urinary bladder and intestine.

7        The pars intermedia of the pituitary secretes the  hormone
     intermedin, which has some effect on  water metabolism.

8        In mature goats secretions of FSH stimulate  follicular development,
     which then becomes a  source of estrogen. LH, working in the presence of
     FSH, produces ovulation; and from the corpus  luteum progesterone is
     released.

9        Estrogen by itself generally stimulates duct  development of the
     mammary glands, while  estrogen and progesterone together cause
     lobulo-alveolar growth. In the goat, however, estrogen  alone will
     initiate abnormal development of the  mammary, producing dilated alveoli
     and even milk  production in some cases. High levels of estrogen  in
     circulation have a negative effect on feed consumption and milk
     production in goats. Estrogen  and progesterone are required both for
     the complete development of the mammary system, along  with the other
     pituitary hormones. Large amounts  of prolactin are to be used just
     prior to parturition  in response to the higher levels of estrogen and
     progesterone at this time. Prolactin matures the  alveolar cells to a
     functional condition. STH and  thyroxine, also exert an influence on the
     amount of  milk produced. Small injections of estradioltestosterone
     produce a colostrum-like milk in  goats, while large doses produce a
     watery, clotted  milk secretion.

10       The hormone of most interest is oxytocin. It is  responsible for
     milk let-down, causing the  myoepithelial cells that surround the
     alveoli to  contract, forcing the milk out into the ducts of the  udder.
     Oxytocin release is initiated in several  ways, the most natural being
     nursing. It will  directly stimulate the afferent nerve fibers of the
     teat, causing the release of the hormone and  transportation via the
     bloodstream to the mammary glands, with subsequent contraction of the
     myoepithelial cells. This milk let-down reflex can  also be initiated by
     other repetitive occurrences,  such as washing the udder, approaching
     the milking area, the sounds of the milking machine or milk  buckets, or
     even the sight of the milker.

11       The process of milk let-down is subject to interference if the goat
     should become excited  through some disturbance. A release of
     epinephrine (adrenalin) follows such excitation.  Epinephrine causes
     constriction of the small  arteries and capillaries of the udder and may
     prevent the myoepithelial cells from contracting.  Therefore, anything
     that may cause a disturbance  or alarm near milking time should be
     avoided.

12       After the initial stimulus for let-down, it takes a  period of about
     20-60 seconds for the response of  oxytocin, which influence will last
     about 5-6  minutes. It is important to milk goats soon after  their
     let-down and not a stimulate more does than  can be milked immediately.
     Due to an inability to  completely close off milk ducts, goats in
     contrast  to cows cannot hold back milk flow entirely.

13       Artificial induction of lactation has been accomplished in goats
     with good results by injections of hexestrol at a daily rate of 0.25 mg.
     Pellet  implantations of estrogen and progesterone have  also
     successfully created udder growth, with final  treatment of estrogens to
     initiate lactation. Art  ificial induction of lactation has experimental
     value, but is not practical for several reasons. Injections must be
     given over a period of time on a  daily basis, or tablet implants must
     be inserted.  The methods are costly, labor intensive, give a low  yield
     of milk, and do not produce income from the sale of the kids. There may
     also be questions of  safety of the milk after using these injections.

14   Milk Composition
         Milk differs in structure and composition from  the blood from which
     it originates. Milk is composed of protein, fats, sugar and mineral
     salts. The osmotic pressure of milk is essentially equal to  that of
     blood. The pH at 6.5 is slightly acidic. Milk  contains higher levels of
     sugar, lipids, calcium,  phosphorus and potassium than blood, but lower
     amounts of protein, sodium and chlorine. Proteins  also differ, since
     milk protein is composed primarily of casein, with smaller amounts of
     albumin,  globulins and others. Blood protein, is primarily  composed of
     albumin and globulins. Fat composition differs, as milk lipids are
     predominantly  triglycerides and blood lipids consist of  phospholipids
     and cholesterol. Non-protein  nitrogen compounds are also found in milk,
     such as  urea, uric acid, creatine, creatinine and ammonia.  Some of
     these are from the blood system, while  others are waste products of the
     mammary gland.

15       Lactose, the milk sugar, is a disaccharide carbohydrate that is
     unique to the mammary gland.  Blood glucose is the primary precursor of
     lactose,  besides propionic acid, while acetate (another  VFA) is
     predominantly used in milk fat synthesis.  Butyrate is generally
     distributed fairly evenly between lactose, casein and fat constituents
     of the  mammary secretion.

16       Milk lipids (fat) consist primarily of  triglycerides, although
     there are small amounts of  phospholipids, cholesterol, fat-soluble
     vitamins,  free fatty acids, and monoglycerides. Fat exists in  small
     globules in the freshly secreted milk, averaging under 4 microns in
     diameter in goats and being  smaller than for cow milk. The outer layer
     of the  globule contains phospholipids, cholesterol, protein, and
     vitamin A and stems from the alveolus.  Acetate is the major precursor
     of milk fat in goats.  Goat milk fat does not rise or ''cream-line'' as
     easily  as cow milk fat since it lacks the coalescing factor  besides
     being of smaller average globule size. Rupturing the milk fat globule
     membrane can add to  off-flavor problems of goat milk. Since milk fat
     synthesis depends on the supply of acetate from  the rumen, any feeding
     regime, such as high grain  feeding which lowers the production of rumen
     acetate, will also lower the fat content of goat milk.  Supplementing
     the feed ration with more crude  fiber sources, such as hay, sunflower
     seeds,  peanuts in their shells, etc. will restore milk fat  levels to
     normal.

17       Most major vitamins are found in goat milk,  some in abundance.
     B-complex vitamins are  manufactured by the rumen flora. Vitamin K is
     synthesized in the rumen and the intestine.  Vitamins A, D and C tend to
     be diet related; expecially vitamin A and the precursor carotenoids.
     Milk levels of vitamin D are usually increased during commercial milk
     processing. Vitamin A in goat  milk is related to blood levels; and no
     carotenoids  are found in goat milk.

18       Minerals in goat milk consist mostly of calcium,  phosphorous,
     sodium, potassium, chlorine,  magnesium and sulfur. Trace amounts of
     aluminum, boron, bromine, cobalt, copper,  fluorine, iodine, iron,
     manganese, molybdenum,  silicon, silver, strontium and zinc are found in
     milk  in less than 1 part per million.

19   Colostrum
         The first milk after a doe kids is of great  significance to the
     young. This colostrum has a  high nutritional value and contains
     antibodies  essential for the survival of the newborn. Goats  like other
     ruminants have a 5-layer placenta  through which no antibodies can be
     transmitted  from the dam to the kid in utero. Thus the kids depend on
     the colostrum as their source of antibodies, providing passive immunity
     until they  are developing their own active immune system.  The period
     in which the immunoglobulins can be  absorbed through the kid's GI tract
     lasts 3 to 4  days in goats. Beyond this time, the digestive enzymes in
     the gastrointestinal tract of the kid will  break down the protein
     structures of the antibodies, rendering them ineffective. The high
     percentage of these immunoglobulins in colostrum,  along with albumin,
     gives it its thick, sticky consistency.

20       Globulin, having a high proline content, is also  important for the
     formation of hemoglobin in the  young kid. Normal milk is much lower in
     globulin  levels, having instead a higher level of casein. The
     functional importance of casein is that it is the  only milk protein
     forming a curd upon coagulation  in the abomasum thereby creating a
     slower moving  food reserve for the young kid.

21       The dry matter content of colostrum is much  higher than in normal
     milk, primarily due to the  large amount of proteins, especially albumin
     and  globulins. The vitamin content of colostrum is also  higher than
     normal; the lactose content is low. The  colostral content of iron is
     generally about 15  times greater than in normal milk, while vitamin A
     and vitamin D levels are about 10 and 3 times  those of normal milk.

22       Colostrum or milk bypasses the reticulorumen  area because of the
     formation of the esophogeal  groove, thus preventing the milk from
     laying in the  rumen and turning rancid, which would then  develop
     scours. The formation of this groove is in  response to the sucking
     reflex of the young kid.  Actual suckling need not occur however, as a
     kid  can drink from a bucket and still bypass the  rumen.

23   Milk Production
         Milk production consists of secretion and excretion. Secretion is
     the formation of milk from its  blood precursors within the alveoli.
     Excretion is  the discharge into the lumen, ducts, cistern, teat  and
     final harvest by the milking person. As the collecting ducts begin to
     fill with the accumulated excretion of the alveolar cells, they
     experience difficulty in ridding themselves of milk. When the  pressure
     in the udder rises, the cells and lumina of  the alveoli become
     distended, compressing the  small collecting ducts. This prevents a
     pressure  overload on the teat sphincter and any leaking of  milk.

24       There is little milk production going on while  milking is being
     done. Udders can extend  themselves greatly to hold high volumes of
     milk.  During the first hour after milking, there is no  discernible
     mammary pressure; but a steady,  gradual increase in pressure occurs
     until the time  of the next milking. Milk let-down results in a
     dramatic increase in mammary pressure which will  gradually subside,
     even if no milk is removed.

25       While much has been said about the virtues of  milking at equal
     intervals (2 x 12 hrs or 3 x 8 hrs) in  order to keep up good production
     levels, studies  have shown that the drop in goat milk production  may
     be quite small. However, stress and mastitis  incidence can be reduced
     significantly by equal  milking intervals or by 3-times milking for very
     high milkers.

26       Rapid removal of milk after stimulation of letdown is essential for
     complete milking. There is  always some residual milk left in the udder
     after  milking, but it is normally less in goats than in  cows. Regular
     and complete milking is one of the  requirements for continuance of
     lactation. The  stimulus of nursing prevents mammary gland  regression.
     The response is due to release of prolactin from the anterior pituitary.
     Lack of this hormone hastens mammary involution and drying off of the
     doe.

27   Stage of Lactation Effects
         There is a great difference in the composition of  milk during the
     various stages of lactation among  does. Management practices such as
     the length of  the dry period, feeding program and general health
     practices play a significant role in the quality and  quantity of milk
     that is produced during lactation.

28       Colostrum appears to be a waste product from  the new development of
     secretory tissues; and  while essential to the kid, is not used for
     human  consumption normally. In some does, during the  first few weeks
     for milk production, there can be  evidence of some blood in the milk.
     This is more  common in the heavy producing, first-time  freshner and
     likely the result of rupturing some  tiny blood vessels in the udder.
     Milking the doe 3  or even 4 times a day may alleviate the problem. A
     lack of calcium may also be involved, and should be  supplemented in the
     diet. Forceful milking is  another possibility.

29       The production level of goat milk increases for  about 20-30 days
     after kidding. During this period  of lactation, there is an inverse
     relationship between levels of milk and fat content. The percentage  of
     total fat as well as the composition of milk fat  varies. Towards the
     end of lactation, fat and protein contents rise while milk yields
     decrease.

30       Calcium and phosphorous levels in milk are high  in colostrum, then
     decrease constantly until near  the end, when they rise again. During
     this period,  the overall salt content of milk tends to increase,
     affecting the taste of milk. Somatic cell numbers  are also very high
     normally in late lactation as well  as in colostrum.

31       Persistency of milk secretion throughout lactation can be
     mathematically expressed by determining the average percentage of
     decrease in milk for  each month, compared to the previous month.
     Goats, given proper feed and not being rebred, will  continue to give
     milk with a high degree of persistency for a long time. High production
     on a  yearly basis must combine high initial production  and good
     persistency, which is a heritable  characteristic.

32   Age Effects
         Milk volume increases with age up to the fourth  or fifth year.
     After that, the volume decreases with  advancing age. The rate at which
     production  decreases is slower than the rate at which it increased to
     maximum yield. The average milking  life of a doe maybe about 12 years.

33   Body Size
         The relationship of size to milk production provides a misleading
     picture. Large does are not  necessarily more efficient producers. Based
     on  gross energetic efficiency, there is little difference  in milk
     production due to species. Although a goat  produces more milk per unit
     of bodyweight than a  cow, the actual net energy efficiency is close.
     Goats  have, however, a relatively high basal metabolic  rate and
     therefore tend to have among the single-purpose dairy breeds a
     relatively high dairy merit  and net efficiency.

34   Estrus
         It appears that upon coming into estrus, the doe  goes through a
     decrease in milk production. This is  only temporary, and is usually
     compensated for by a brief period of higher than normal production
     after the estrus cycle. There may also be an increase in the level of
     fat produced during the estrus  period, as is often the case when milk
     production is  lowered.

35   Disease Effects
         Most diseases, including mastitis reduce milk  yields. Fat content
     will rise due to lower milk production. The solids (and minerals),
     albumin,  globulin and non-protein nitrogen levels will increase, while
     casein and lactose contents decrease.

36   Dry Period
         A dry period for the doe is necessary to rebuild  her body reserves,
     especially minerals and to  prepare for the period of heavy production
     in the  next lactation. Fattening during the dry period can  lead to
     ketosis or pregnancy toxemia problems. A  60-day dry period is
     considered normal. Goats  without a dry period tend to produce less in
     the  next lactation.

37   Season Effects
         Temperature, humidity, management practices  and feeds tend to vary
     with seasons, thereby affecting milk and fat production. Does test lower
     in the  summer than in the winter, not necessarily due to  drop in milk
     production. Does which freshen later  in the spring or early summer will
     usually have a  higher test average for the year than does freshening at
     other times.

38       There are many variables that can affect quality  and quantity of
     goat milk. Many may be hard to  control. Careful and efficient
     management with a  willingness to learn and try new ideas, is certain to
     increase productivity of the goats and the quality  of their milk.




תתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתThe National Dairy Database (1992)תתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתת
תתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתת\NDB\GOAT\TEXT2\F7תתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתת


%f TITLE;MILK SECRETION
%f COLLECTION;GOAT HANDBOOK
%f ORIGIN;United States
%f DATE_INCLUDED;June 1992
